        Overview of the Acoustic Improvement
       Program for the 9- by 15-Foot Low Speed
                    Wind Tunnel
             David B Stephens1, Dale E. Van Zante2 and David E. Stark
                       NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135, USA


               This report gives an overview of a recent improvement project to reduce the background
           noise in the NASA Glenn Research Center 9- by 15-Foot Low Speed Wind Tunnel. Noise
           surveys of the original tunnel configuration indicated that flow surface noise in the test section
           and noise propagating from other tunnel regions were the primary background noise
           contributors. Several novel features were incorporated in the design of the upgraded tunnel,
           including a low noise flow surface and serpentine baffles for noise reduction, along with
           acoustically treated turning vanes and a new diffuser. Three companion papers present
           implementation details including the acoustic design and the aerodynamic quality/design
           CFD. The upgrades reduced background noise in the test section by about 10 dBA over a wide
           range of flow speeds and frequencies. It is hoped this will be a useful summary to aid future
           users of the facility and wind tunnel engineers everywhere.


                                                 I. Introduction
This report describes an acoustic improvement project carried out in the NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC) 9- by
15-Foot Low Speed Wind Tunnel (9x15 LSWT) and the effect on the acoustic measurement capabilities of the facility.
The demolition portion of the project began in June 2017 and construction was completed in March 2019. The 9x15
LSWT is one of two test sections in the wind tunnel loop, the other being the original supersonic test section. The 8-
by 6-Foot Supersonic Wind Tunnel (8x6 SWT) at NASA Glenn Research Center was completed in 1949 as an open
loop propulsion tunnel for testing ramjets and other high-speed air breathing engines. The operation of the tunnel and
test engines was found to produce objectionable noise for miles around the facility, so an immediate and
comprehensive acoustic mitigation upgrade was conducted during the first half of the year 1950 [1]. This upgrade
included the addition of a series of Helmholtz resonators tuned to reduce frequencies as low as 5 Hz, building a large
muffler downstream of the 8x6 SWT diffuser and the addition of acoustic panels. The 8x6 SWT was converted into a
closed loop tunnel with the addition of a return leg in 1956. The 9x15 LSWT was built in the return leg of the 8x6
SWT in 1969 [2] The 9x15 LSWT test section is well isolated from the noise of the drive system for the facility due
to the closed loop design.
    The 9x15 LSWT was designed for performance testing of vertical and short takeoff (V/STOL) aircraft models, but
interest was growing in aircraft engine noise and a first-generation acoustic treatment was added in 1975 to facilitate
microphone measurements. An updated acoustic treatment was installed in 1986 to support testing of high-speed
turboprops for noise research. Since then, the tunnel has been used principally for acoustic and performance testing
of aircraft propulsions systems. This report describes a major refurbishment of the 9x15 LSWT to improve it as an
acoustic and aerodynamic propulsion test facility, with the objective of supporting research for future low-noise
propulsion systems. A schematic of the 8x6/9x15 Wind Tunnel Complex is shown in Figure 1. The companion papers




1
    Aerospace Engineer, Acoustics Branch, AIAA Lifetime Member
2
    Aerospace Engineer, Acoustics Branch, AIAA Senior Member


                                                           1
to this report discuss the aerodynamics [3] of the facility, the acoustics [4], and the computational simulations used to
develop the design [5].




                             Figure 1: Line Drawing of 8x6/9x15 Wind Tunnel Complex

                                         II. Motivation for Upgrade
    The nacelle configuration and acoustic characteristics of contemporary and proposed future ultra-high bypass ratio
(UHBR) propulsor systems were the impetus for the wind tunnel upgrades. Figure 2 illustrates the substantial changes
in propulsor noise sources and directivity as engines have evolved from turbojets to UHBR systems. UHBR systems
are now fan noise dominated in the aft quadrant. Noise measurements at forward and adequate aft directivity angles
must be achievable so that the ‘10dB down’ points can be determined for the Effective Perceived Noise Level (EPNL)
calculation. This necessitated additional treated test section length downstream of the fan model location.




                                                           2
  Figure 2: Evolution of noise from Epstein [6] showing the change in acoustic sources as the engine bypass ratio
                                                 (BPR) increases.

    Nacelles for UHBR fan systems are also becoming shorter to reduce their weight and drag penalties. For legacy
fan configurations with conventional length inlets (L/D ~0.5) there was little influence of the tunnel freestream Mach
on the fan/nacelle aerodynamics or acoustics. In other words, if there was adequate ‘cleanup’ flow, acoustic
measurements could be acquired at a lower test section flow speed, typically Mach = 0.1. For short inlet, UHBR fan
systems, the tunnel Mach does influence the fan/nacelle system aerodynamics and acoustics. This requires acoustics
testing at Mach = 0.2 so that the fan system is as close as possible to the conditions it would experience during a
typical landing and take-off cycle. This greatly increased the background noise in the test section which could lead to
signal-to-noise issues, especially at the fan approach power setting, for the original test section configuration.

    In early spring 2012, a test was conducted to study noise sources in the wind tunnel. The objective was to acquire
a comprehensive database of the noise levels around the tunnel loop that could be used to support a background noise
reduction task [7] The NASA Environmentally Responsible Aviation Program supported the testing and a study by
Jacobs Engineering to identify improvements for lower background noise. Discussions with engine manufacturers
during 2014 convinced NASA management to support the upgrade activity.

                                      III. Design and Decision Process

    The full data set from this pre-construction testing was delivered to Jacobs Engineering for analysis and preparation
of an improvement proposal. Part of their work included modeling the noise through the wind tunnel loop as a number
of individual sources that were calibrated to match the measurements. The measurements and resulting model for
noise in the test section are shown in Figure 3. This model allowed for noise reduction concepts to be evaluated and
their overall effectiveness determined. The main finding was that the dominant noise in the test section above 2 kHz
was due to roughness noise, caused by air flow over the perforated sheet metal surfaces of the test section. Other
sources included the noise from the upstream flow control Doors 1 & 2 area, seen in Figure 1. The diffuser was
identified as having a divergence angle too wide for attached flow, causing unsteadiness and potentially noise. Doors
1 & 2 and 4 & 5 were all noted as potential sound leakage paths, for nearby sources like cars on the lab and the
neighboring Aero-Acoustic Propulsion Laboratory, as well as more distant outdoor sources like aircraft operating out
of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport.
    A desired background noise goal was developed by NASA and provided to Jacobs Engineering, also shown in
Figure 3. This noise goal was generated by compiling data on the quietest aircraft engine fan models tested in the 9x15
LSWT and generating a composite spectrum that represented the minimum amplitude of all models. Then a 10 dB
reduction was applied to generate a desired background noise level that would provide an excellent signal-to-noise
ratio for any fan model anticipated in the foreseeable future. It was recognized that this goal was very aggressive.
Multiple options were requested as an outcome of the feasibility study conducted by Jacobs Engineering.



                                                           3
                                         90
      1/3rd Octave Band Sound Pressure
                                         80

                                         70
                 Levels (dB)




                                         60

                                         50            Pre-Construction Noise Measurements
                                                       Pre-Construction Noise Goal
                                         40            Model Fit to Pre-Construction Measurements
                                                       Prediction of Improved Closed-Wall Tunnel, Roughness Height 0.1 mm
                                                       Prediction of Improved Open Jet Wind Tunnel
                                         30
                                              100                     1000                       10000                         100000
                                                                             Frequency (Hz)
                                         Figure 3: Measured and predicted inflow noise for 9x15 LSWT at Mach 0.20 flow speed
    With the identification of roughness noise from the test section walls as a dominate noise source over most of the
frequency range of interest, one proposal was to convert the facility into an open jet wind tunnel, where models are
held on struts and microphones are typically placed outside of the flow. While this design was potentially quieter,
several major drawbacks were evident. First, models would be mounted on struts and this would be an inconvenience.
A second drawback is the smaller test volume that would be available. Any jet facility results in shear layers where
the high-speed flow mixes with the surrounding air, so tests are conducted by necessity in the potential core of the jet
flow. This would result in a much smaller usable test volume. Combining model support struts with a shear layer
creates a new potential noise source that would have to be considered and might be unique for each strut configuration.
Finally, the model engines tested in the 9x15 LSWT are often pitched to an angle of attack. This would potentially
complicate any jet collector design, which would also be a new noise source. In addition, this option was expensive.
The open jet design was not pursued.
    The final design chosen was a 5-part upgrade to the closed wall wind tunnel design, with special care taken to
improve the test section flow surface, discussed in the next section of this report.

                                                                   IV. Upgrade Program
   Figure 4 shows the entire 8x6/9x15 Wind Tunnel Complex. The upper (return) leg of the facility houses the 9x15
LSWT. From upstream to downstream, the improvements are numbered in order from 1 to 5.
    1) Acoustic turning vanes in turn 2
    2) Serpentine baffles
    3) Upgraded test section
    4) Acoustically treated diffuser
    5) Acoustic turning vanes in turn 3
The five modifications to the wind tunnel complex are detailed in the next five subsections.




                                                                                 4
                    Figure 4: Render of the 8x6/9x15 Wind Tunnel Complex showing 5 upgrades



1. Turning Vanes in Turn 2
    The modification furthest upstream of the test section was made to Turn 2, upstream of flow control Doors 1 & 2.
Acoustically treated turning vanes were added. This turn was previously empty, except for acoustic treatment on the
wall opposite the muffler exit and a set of parallel acoustic baffles that formed the outlet of the 8x6 SWT before the
return leg was built. The new turning vanes are identical to one another, 12 m (40 ft) tall with structural splitters at 3
m (10 ft) vertical increments. A screen was installed on the upstream side of the turning vanes, covering the entire
flow area of the tunnel. The screen provides a small pressure-drop, adding flow resistance to even out the mass flow
out of the acoustic muffler before entering the turning vanes. The acoustic treatment on the south wall (left in the
picture) was retained from the 1950 acoustic modification. The before and after condition of Turn 2 is shown in Figure
5, looking upstream.




                  a) Before Construction                                        b) After Construction
                                                    Figure 5: Turn 2

2. Serpentine Baffles
    The region between the cooler and the honeycomb, seen in Figure 1, was a large straight and empty section of the
rectangular ducting of the wind tunnel shell. This area was identified as a good location to add acoustic treatment. A
series of concepts utilizing long straight baffles or shorter staggered baffles were explored before a final design was
selected. The best acoustic performance was expected if line-of-sight could be eliminated, and a serpentine baffle
pattern was developed to meet this criterion. The ceiling also slopes downward in this section, as the height of the


                                                            5
cooler is greater than that of the honeycomb. Accurate measurement and fabrication were required for a successful
installation. The new serpentine baffles are shown in Figure 6.




                  a) Before Construction                                      b) After Construction
                     Figure 6: Serpentine Baffles Inserted Between the Cooler and Honeycomb

3. Test Section
    The test section flow surface was identified as a major source of noise, so a low-noise solution was pursued. NASA
contracted with Virginia Tech to utilize their wall jet roughness noise facility to study candidate surfaces. After
studying a variety of fiberglass and metal woven materials, a final design was chosen to be a micronic wire cloth
diffusion bonded to a perforated plate. The flow surface is detailed in the companion paper describing the facility
acoustics [4]. The old and new flow surfaces are shown in Figure 7. Vendors of the diffusion bonded material worked
to ensure the materials were undamaged, clean and flat. A non-trivial rejection rate was experienced but consistent
results were eventually achieved. It was recognized that even wiping them flow surface with solvent could be a source
of contamination and degrade the acoustic performance.




                  a) Before Construction                                      b) After Construction
                                 Figure 7: Old and New Test Section Flow Surfaces

    The biggest change to the facility was the complete replacement of the test section. The original steel frame was
sized for a 9- by 15-foot cross section when the walls were composed of 1/2" thick aluminum plate. When the wind
tunnel was modified with 13” deep acoustic treatment in 1986 [8], the deep sections were fit between the beams and
shallow 2” treatment was used over the beams. This resulted in a patchwork of acoustic impedance throughout the test
section. The upgrade provided the opportunity to replace the structure with a frame that was 13” larger in all interior
dimensions so that acoustic boxes could be uniform depth. Other design features of the new acoustic boxes include
rear fasteners to keep the flow surface smooth and a felt seal between boxes. The test section was lengthened by nearly
1.5 m (5 feet), giving more room for measurements of aft-radiated fan noise. A view from inside the test section is
shown in Figure 8.


                                                          6
                  a) Before Construction                                       b) After Construction
                                      Figure 8: Test Section, Looking Upstream

4. Diffuser
    The original diffuser was constructed of steel and concrete with no acoustic treatment. The diffusion angle was
large and introduced the risk of separated flow. The new diffuser has acoustic treatment on all surfaces, except for a
loading ramp in the center. The diffuser was also lengthened as much as possible, resulting in a lower diffusion angle.
The diffuser during and after the construction project is shown in Figure 9.




                  a) Before Construction                                       b) After Construction
                                       Figure 9: Diffuser Looking Downstream

5. Turning Vanes in Turn 3
    The 8x6/9x15 Wind Tunnel Complex was built without any turning vanes in the corners. The flow exited the
diffuser into Turn 3 where a large volume was available for the flow to decelerate before the flow entered the air dryer.
Since the new diffuser is narrower, turning vanes were added with trailing edges designed to aggressively diffuse the
flow. These vanes are also acoustically treated to reduce noise propagating towards the 9x15 LSWT test section. The
before and after condition of Turn 3 is shown in Figure 10.




                  a) Before Construction                                       b) After Construction
                                      Figure 10: Turning Vanes Before and After




                                                           7
                                             V. Construction Phase
Prior to the start of the construction phase, soil condition tests and tunnel dimensional checks were performed to
compare with historical documentation to ensure successful acoustic component installation. The construction phase
was managed by prime contractor Jacobs Engineering under a Design/Build contract and was supported by three main
subcontractors who provided the test section/diffuser steel support structure, the test section acoustic treatment, and
the acoustic components for the other four modifications. Funding of the construction phase was made with three
incremental payments and the conversion from NASA programmatic to Construction of Facility (CoF) funding also
caused delays in the completion date since funding conversions only occurred at specific times in the fiscal year. The
total cost of the task was approximately $19M. Primary vendors contributing to the effort are listed in Table 1.
                                            Table 1 Primary Vendors List
              Vendor                                                Contribution
              Jacobs Engineering, Tullahoma, TN                     Prime Contractor
              Metal Products Company, McMinnville, TN               Fabricated Acoustic Boxes
              Purolator Products Company, Tulsa, OK                 Diffusion Bonded Panels
              Porous Metal Filters Inc., Spring, TX                 Diffusion Bonded Panels
              TAB Ingenieure GmbH, Fellbach, Germany                Acoustic Turning Vanes and Baffles
              North Bay Construction, Westlake, OH                  On-site Construction

The construction phase started with the demolition phase from June to August 2017 to remove the existing Corner 2,
test section, and diffuser structures. Additionally, new access door openings were cut into the tunnel shell in Corner 2
and the Serpentine Baffle sections to accommodate installation activities, but also to support inspection and
maintenance activities over the life of the tunnel.

Following the demolition phase, construction activities in all five areas occurred from September 2017 to March 2019.
Construction activities were performed from the upstream to downstream end of the tunnel to align with the component
fabrication schedule. Some changes to the phasing of the original construction schedule activities occurred to account
for shipping and customs delays in the delivery of overseas vendor acoustic components. In addition, test section
acoustic face sheet fabrication experienced a high scrap rate due to stringent quality specifications, resulting in a four
month slip in the completion date to March 2019. Throughout the duration of the phase, photographic documentation
of the construction was captured from the same physical positions/perspectives and on a regular time interval to
provide a historical record of the task.

The Corner 2 acoustic turning vanes, serpentine acoustic baffles, diffuser acoustic treatment, and corner 3 acoustic
turning vanes were installed by the same subcontractor workforce to ensure consistency in the installation and finish
quality of these modifications. In addition to the installation work, reviews of these areas noted opportunities to
eliminate potential noise sources by relocating utilities and removing other features no longer in use.

The test section replacement was the most challenging modification, due to the amount and quality of work necessary
to minimize the noise, and the nature of the design/build contract. The original plan was to maintain the structure and
only replace the flow surface acoustic treatment. The variation in acoustic impedance of the original treatment was a
limiting factor in achieving the maximum noise reduction, so a complete replacement was performed. Under the
design/build contract, both the final detailed acoustic design and initial construction of the test section were
concurrently supported. In addition to the required noise reduction, safety, operability, and capabilities also had to be
retained. This required some acoustic boxes to be constructed with attachment hard points and wiring pass-throughs
that would allow for the installation of existing wind tunnel instrumentation, model assembly devices, lifting devices
and allow for future test section requirements.

   Following the completion of construction, a detailed inspection and verification of all the modifications was
performed. A punch list of items was identified that warranted further work to ensure the overall quality of the task
and to document the noise reductions achieved during the subsequent validation phase of the task.




                                                            8
                                      VI. Noise Reduction Summary

Many of the recent improvements in acoustic wind tunnels have been in support of the automotive industry [9]. These
wind tunnels are typically designed as a “3/4 open jet,” where the floor of the test section is smooth and solid,
mimicking a road surface, and the walls and ceiling are open to a large surrounding chamber. This has some trade-
offs with closed wall tunnels like the 9x15 LSWT, but generally the 3/4 open jet design is expected to be quieter.
There is also the option for placing microphones inside or outside of the air stream, while a closed wall wind tunnel
only offers the first option. Figure 11 shows A-weighted overall sound pressure level (OASPL) measurement of the
9x15 LSWT test section compared with the DaimlerChrysler AAWT, which is a very quiet facility that opened in
2002 [10]. Prior to renovation, the 9x15 LSWT was approximately 10 dB louder than the AAWT, while the updated
design is shown to be quite competitive, with equal noise levels at around 180 KPH (Mach 0.15). The OASPL metric
integrates the noise across frequencies (in the case of the 9x15 LSWT data, 400 Hz to 10 kHz), and the A-weighting
puts emphasis on noises in the range of human hearing. Aerospace facilities often test sub-scale models of components,
with the frequency range of interest scaling linearly with model size.
                  100
                   95
                   90
                   85
   OASPL, dB(A)




                   80
                   75
                   70
                   65                                                              DaimlerChrysler AAWT
                   60                                                              9x15 LSWT 2012
                   55                                                              9x15 LSWT 2019
                   50
                        50    100                 150             200                     250                 300
                                                    Flow Speed, KPH


                                    Figure 11 - Comparison of inflow noise level
Figure 12 shows the frequency dependent noise from the 9x15 LSWT and how it compares with other closed wall
acoustic wind tunnels for flow speeds around Mach 0.1. The noise at 500 Hz in the 9x15 LSWT is believed to be due
to the temporary microphone strut used to collect this data, before a new microphone holder was available. The NASA
Ames 40x80 wind tunnel was a major inspiration for the 9x15 LSWT improvement project and their reports [11] [12]
were extremely valuable. Similarly, Jacobs Engineering used their experience with the 9x15 LSWT to improve the
Lockheed Martin Low-Speed Wind Tunnel [13]. Aside from being large closed-wall aeroacoustic wind tunnels with
micronic wire cloth flow surfaces, the three facilities are otherwise quite different. Despite that, the noise amplitude
and spectral shape is quite similar above about 5 kHz. This is possibly due to the flow surface shared by the three test
sections. An in-depth comparison of the facilities is beyond the scope of the present report.




                                                           9
                        70

                        65

                        60
   1/3 Octave SPL, dB




                        55

                        50

                        45
                                          Lockheed Martin LSWT @ 70 mph (Mach 0.091)
                        40                Ames 40x80, Mach 0.1 (NASA TP 2003-212259, Table 7)
                                          NASA 9x15 Validation (Mach 0.1)
                        35
                             100                                   1000                                    10000
                                                                     Frequency, Hz

                                   Figure 12 - Sound level vs frequency for three closed wall acoustic wind tunnels

A new microphone traverse was developed, with the intent of reducing self-noise of the microphone instrumentation
and to measure along the full length of the test section. The new traversing microphone is shown in Figure 13. The
traversing microphone is used to measure noise along a sideline next to a model being tested. This provides data for a
“simulated flyover” for aircraft and propulsion system models. Instead of the model flying overhead of an observer,
the observer (microphone) travels past a fixed model. The measured sound is readily used to compute aircraft noise
metrics. The new traverse includes 5 microphones to assess the circumferential directivity of noise around the model.
The support arm is mounted through brush seals at the upper and lower corners with the traverse mechanical system
located outside of the test section. The previous traversing microphone was mounted inside the test section with
surfaces that could produce, reflect and radiate noise.




                                                                         10
                                        Figure 13 - New microphone traverse

                                         VII. Other Modifications
    Additional upgrades were made during the facility renovation. The facility data system called ESCORT was
replaced by a next-generation in-house designed system called COBRA. The wind tunnel control system was updated,
and the software and interfaces were overhauled. Repairs were made throughout the entire facility including the
flexible nozzle used to create supersonic flow in the 8x6 test section. Temperature and pressure measurement systems
were also upgraded for increased accuracy and better usability. The control room was remodeled with an improved
layout, better ergonomics and a new HVAC system.

                                             VIII. Conclusions
    The acoustic improvement project carried out in the NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC) 9- by 15-Foot Low
Speed Wind Tunnel (9x15 LSWT) was completed in March 2019. The primary acoustic improvements included
adding acoustically treated turning vanes, serpentine baffles, a new test section with low-noise wall treatment, and an
acoustically treated diffuser. Acoustic tests to date have demonstrated an inflow noise reduction of ~10 dB over a wide
frequency range at test section flow speeds up to Mach = 0.2. The improvements provide lower background noise
levels that meet requirements for evaluating future low-noise propulsion systems.

                                                 Acknowledgments
   Thanks to former NASA Glenn Research Center Director Jim Free for supporting this project with discretionary
seed funding. Thanks to the Aeronautics Evaluation and Test Capabilities project for funding the bulk of the
improvement task. Support from the Acoustics Branch was funded by the Advanced Air Transport Technology
project.

                                                 IX.References


[1] L. L. Beranek, S. Labate and U. Ingard, "Acoustical Treatment of the NACA 8- by 6-Foot Supersonic Propulsion
    Wind Tunnel," NACA TN-3378, June 1955.
[2] J. A. Yuska, J. H. Diedrich and N. Clough, "Lewis 9- by 15-Foot V/STOL Wind Tunnel," NASA/TM-X-2305,
    July 1971.



                                                          11
[3] D. A. Rinehart and A. M. Johnson, "Full Aero-Thermal Characterization of Acoustic Improvements to the 9-
     by- 15 Foot Low Speed Wind Tunnel," AIAA Aviation Forum, Washington DC, USA, 2021.
[4] D. B. Stephens, "Acoustic Improvements to the 9- by 15-Foot Low Speed Wind Tunnel," AIAA Aviation
     Forum, Washington DC, USA, 2021.
[5] P. Agarwal, J. C. Yen, M. Karanikolov, S. N. Best, E. G. Duell and P. A. Nagle, "Computational Verification
     Analysis of 9- by 15- Foot Low Speed Wind Tunnel Acoustic Upgrade Design," AIAA Aviation Forum,
     Washington DC, USA, 2021.
[6] A. Epstein, "The Lessons of P&W’s Geared Turbofan(TM) Engine and the Implications for the Future," in
     Keynote Address, International Symposium on Air Breathing Engines (ISABE), Phoenix, AZ, USA, October
     2015.
[7] D. B. Stephens, "The Acoustic Environment of the NASA Glenn 9- by 15-foot Low-Speed Wind Tunnel. AIAA-
     2015-2684," in 21st AIAA/CEAS Aeroacoustics Conference, Dallas, Texas, USA, June 2015.
[8] M. D. Dahl and R. P. Woodward, "Comparison between design and installed acoustic characteristics of NASA
     Lewis 9- by 15-foot low-speed wind tunnel acoustic treatment," NASA TP-2966, 1990.
[9] E. Duell, J. Walter, S. Arnette and J. Yen, "Recent Advances in Large-Scale Aeroacoustic Wind Tunnels (AIAA
     2002-2503)," 2002.
[10] J. Walter, E. Duell, B. Martindale, S. Arnette, R. Geierman, M. Gleason and G. Romberg, "The DaimlerChrysler
     Full-Scale Aeroacoustic Wind Tunnel," SAE TECHNICAL PAPER SERIES 2003-01-0426, 2003.
[11] P. T. Soderman, F. H. Schmitz, C. S. Allen, S. M. Jaeger, J. N. Sacco, M. Mosher and J. A. Hayes, "Design and
     Development of a Deep Acoustic Lining for the 40- by 80-Foot Wind Tunnel Test Section NASA/TP-2002-
     211850," 2002.
[12] C. S. Allen, S. M. Jaeger and P. T. Soderman, "Background Noise Sources and Levels in the NASA Ames 40-
     by 80-Foot Wind Tunnel at the Turn of the Century: A Status Report NASA/TP-2003-212259".
[13] S. Best and J. Zunich, "Lockheed Martin Low-Speed Wind Tunnel Acoustic Upgrade," SAE International
     Journal of Passenger Cars - Mechanical Systems-V127-6EJ, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 493-506, 2018.
[14] R. M. Allen and D. H. Reed, "Development of the Boeing Low Speed Aeroacoustic Facility (LSAF)," in
     DGLR/AIAA-92-02-030, May 1992.




                                                       12
