Status of Mars Retropropulsion Testing in the Langley
             Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel

                                               Karl T. Edquist∗
                         NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia 23681


       Future Mars human landings will be enabled by a powered descent phase starting at
    supersonic conditions, something which has never been done before on a Mars mission.
    Significant aerosciences challenges exist due to jet interactions between the retrorocket en-
    gine plumes, freestream flow, and vehicle that will affect the aerodynamic behavior during
    powered descent. Historically, wind tunnel tests have been used to study the interactions
    with inert gas exhaust simulants in place of rocket engines. On the computational side,
    flowfield simulations have been completed at full-scale conditions, but the available ground
    and flight data are not appropriate for calibrating computational uncertainties for aerody-
    namic interference on proposed Mars descent vehicles, due to insufficient data, dissimilar
    vehicle geometries, and disparate operating conditions. A wind tunnel test has been de-
    signed to begin addressing powered descent aerodynamics risks for large-scale human Mars
    entry concepts and to identify gaps in computational predictive capabilities. The test will
    be conducted in the NASA Langley Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel and is designed with im-
    provements in model design and data products over past tests. The test campaign will
    be run using sub-scale model geometries derived from NASA powered descent reference
    vehicles: a blunt low lift-to-drag vehicle and a more slender geometry that generates higher
    unpowered lift. Both models have been fabricated and are ready for testing. The blunt
    model is equipped with the flexibility to examine the effects of nozzle pointing direction,
    number, location, size, and area ratio. The main measurements are heatshield aerody-
    namic interference forces and moments with a custom flow-through balance, discrete and
    distributed heatshield pressure, and high-speed flowfield visualization. This paper covers
    the test objectives, facility, models and instrumentation, and planned test matrix.




 ∗ Aerospace Technologist, Atmospheric Flight & Entry Systems Branch, AIAA Associate Fellow, karl.t.edquist@nasa.gov.




                                                       1 of 22

                                 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Nomenclature

Symbols

Ae         nozzle exit area                                                     in2
Aref       aerodynamic reference area = projected heatshield frontal area       in2
At         nozzle throat area                                                   in2
CT         vacuum thrust coefficient = T /q̄Aref
L/D        aerodynamic lift-to-drag ratio
Me         nozzle exit Mach number
M∞         freestream Mach number
pc         nozzle total pressure                                                psia
pe         nozzle exit static pressure                                          psia
q̄         dynamic pressure, 12 ρ∞ V∞ 2
                                                                                lbf /f t2
Rn         nozzle exit radial location                                          in
Rb         heatshield radius                                                    in
Re∞        tunnel Reynolds number                                               1/f t
T          thrust                                                               lbf
                                                                                ◦
Tc         nozzle total temperature                                               F
                                                                                ◦
T0         tunnel total temperature                                               F
V∞         freestream velocity                                                  m/s
α          angle of attack                                                      deg
φ          roll angle                                                           deg
ρ∞         freestream density                                                   kg/m3
θcant      angle between nozzle axis and model longitudinal axis                deg


Acronyms


AI         aerodynamic interference
CFD        computational fluid dynamics
EDL        entry, descent, and landing
HIAD       Hypersonic Inflatable Aerodynamic Decelerator
HPA        high pressure air
NASA       National Aeronautics and Space Administration
PSP        pressure-sensitive paint
SRP        supersonic retropropulsion
LUPWT      Langley Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel




                                                 2 of 22

                           American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
I.    Introduction
    ver the past decade plus, NASA studies of human-scale Mars entry, descent, and landing (EDL) have
O    concluded that new technologies are needed to enhance or enable delivering payloads to Mars that
are much larger than is currently possible.      1–7
                                             One of the enabling technologies is the use of retrorockets,
starting at supersonic conditions, in place of a parachute. All studies show that powered descent beginning
at supersonic conditions, or supersonic retropropulsion (SRP), is an enabling Mars descent technology for
payloads larger than approximately five metric tons. Supersonic parachutes have been used for all of NASA’s
successful scientific robotic missions to Mars, but they are not scalable for human exploration payloads (ap-
proximately 20 metric tons). The largest payload to land on Mars, the Perseverance rover, had a total mass
of approximately one metric ton. Powered flight has been successfully executed at Mars subsonic conditions,
but it has never been needed at supersonic speeds. The jet interactions between the exhaust plumes and
surrounding flowfield result in aerodynamic interference (AI) forces and moments imparted on the entry
vehicle that are different from normal unpowered aerodynamics. The uncertainties in powered descent AI on
entry vehicle stability, control, and aeroheating are not well understood within the aerosciences community.
Thus, there is low confidence in using unvalidated computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods to predict
the aerodynamic and aeroheating loads on Mars powered descent vehicles. CFD uncertainties must be in-
vestigated in much more detail than they have been to date, given how significantly they will factor into the
overall EDL risk and future mission success for landing humans on Mars.

     The current NASA Mars entry system concepts are shown in Figure 1. The reference vehicles are iden-
tified by the aerodynamic lift-to-drag ratio (L/D) that they can generate during the hypersonic unpowered
entry phase of EDL. The first reference vehicle (Low-L/D) is based on a Hypersonic Inflatable Aerodynamic
Decelerator (HIAD) aeroshell that can generate lift-to-drag ratios similar to what the rigid Mars robotic
aeroshells can generate (0.24 for the Mars Science Laboratory aeroshell at an angle of attack of about 16
degrees). The second reference vehicle (Mid-L/D) is based on a more slender rigid aeroshell that has body
flaps and can generate a higher lift-to-drag ratio (0.54 at a hypersonic trim angle of attack of 55 degrees).
Both vehicles have been analyzed assuming a total of eight liquid oxygen and methane (LO2 /CH4 ) gas gen-
erator cycle engines, each producing approximately 100 kN of thrust, in order to execute a powered descent
phase that ends in landing within 50 meters of the target site.5




(a) Low-L/D (16.4-meter inflatable aeroshell diameter)             (b) Mid-L/D (22-meter rigid aeroshell length)


                               Figure 1. Concepts for human Mars entry systems.7


   Wind tunnel testing, flight testing, and CFD analysis all will play a critical role in advancing powered
descent aerosciences. A previous project was used to complete two sub-scale SRP wind tunnel tests8, 9 and
companion flowfield analyses10–12 that showed promising results in the ability of CFD to capture the primary
SRP flowfield features. Figure 2 shows example results from a SRP test in the Langley Unitary Plan Wind
Tunnel (LUPWT) in 2010. The figure shows instantaneous snapshots of a high-speed schlieren video and a
CFD solution for a single-nozzle model with high-pressure air (HPA) jets. Comparisons of general flowfield


                                                         3 of 22

                                   American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
structure, discrete pressures on the model surface, and dynamic frequencies gave confidence in the ability
of CFD to capture the key features of a relatively simple retropropulsion flowfield. However, AI forces and
moments were not measured in the test and the model geometries were not based on current flight-scale
concepts. A subsequent project was focused on comparing CFD analysis to one of SpaceX’s Falcon 9 first
stage return flights that used SRP to decelerate the vehicle.13–15 This effort greatly advanced the knowledge
base for generating large grids and running retropropulsion CFD cases on very large domains with a wide
range of length scales. Despite differences in geometry and engine configuration compared to current NASA
Mars concepts, the Falcon 9 flight data provided a valuable opportunity to compare Navier-Stokes codes
against flight data at Mars-relevant conditions. The CFD results were consistent with the available flight
data, both of which showed that the total drag force was dominated by the engine thrust during powered
descent. This is in contrast to more recent CFD calculations that show non-negligible aerodynamic drag for
NASA Mars concepts, due to the Mars vehicles having significant aerodynamic surface area exposed during
powered descent and the engine nozzle exit pressures being similar to ambient conditions.16




             (a) Schlieren                                                          (b) Overflow CFD solution


Figure 2. Schlieren image (a) and Overflow CFD prediction (b) of a single-nozzle SRP model tested in the
LUPWT in 2010.11 Black vertical bars in the schlieren image are bars in the tunnel test section window.


    A new SRP test has been designed for the LUPWT, with improvements in model geometries and data
products. Portions of the wind tunnel models are scaled versions of the current Low-L/D and Mid-L/D
reference vehicles. The outer molds lines and sample engine configurations for both full-scale vehicles are
shown in Figs. 3 and 4. Other configurations have also been explored for the Low-L/D reference vehicle
with the engines at different locations on the heatshield.16 Figure 5 shows sample reference trajectories for
both vehicles, including transition to powered flight at supersonic conditions.




                                                     4 of 22

                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                 (a) Front view14                                              (b) Side view14


Figure 3. Low-L/D Mars powered descent vehicle geometry (16.4-meter maximum diameter, evenly spaced
engines shown).




                (a) Bottom view14                                              (b) Side view14


           Figure 4. Mid-L/D Mars powered descent vehicle geometry (22-meter total length).




                                                    5 of 22

                              American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
            Figure 5. Mars flight reference trajectories. Thicker lines indicate powered descent.


    The planned wind tunnel test was designed to address some of the limitations of past ground test data, and
will provide a richer SRP data set against which to calibrate CFD models. The test itself is part of a larger
NASA program17 that seeks to evaluate the capabilities of CFD flow solvers to accurately calculate complex
flowfields, including SRP. A previous paper18 provided an initial overview of the planned test campaign and
CFD analysis to date. This paper and a companion paper19 provide updates on the test preparations and
CFD analysis. Other aspects of the test campaign include additional pre-test CFD analysis details,20, 21 an
experimental plume visualization seeding method,22 and a custom six-component force and moment bal-
ance23 developed for the test. The following sections describe the test objectives, wind tunnel facility, model
designs and instrumentation, and test matrix parameters. Future publications will follow after the comple-
tion of the test and will include detailed results and uncertainty analysis, direct comparisons between the test
data and CFD results, and an overall assessment of CFD uncertainties for SRP in a wind tunnel environment.



II.    Test Objectives
    The main objective of the planned test is to produce high-quality quantitative SRP data in a wind tunnel
environment by using test articles and conditions that are as relevant to Mars flight conditions as is possible
and within constraints of the budget, schedule, and facility. Starting with the model design, the main objec-
tive was to fabricate sub-scale versions of current Low-L/D and Mid-L/D Mars reference powered descent
vehicles, at a size suitable for testing in the LUPWT. With those models, the primary goal is to explore the
effects of different simulated engine nozzle parameters (nozzle location, number, pointing direction, size, area
ratio, and thrust) and tunnel/model conditions (Mach number, model attitude) on the measured data. Each
model configuration is to be tested across a range of facility and scaling parameter conditions: freestream
Mach number (M∞ ), angle of attack (α), roll angle (φ), and engine scaling parameters (primarily thrust
coefficient, CT ). Measurements are to include direct aerodynamic forces and moments from the heatshield,
steady-state and high-frequency discrete surface pressures on the external model surfaces, and global steady-
state heatshield surface pressure using pressure-sensitive paint. A new seeding method will be attempted
that uses oil droplets injected into the model flow path in order to visualize and measure the exhaust plumes.
The end goal of the test is to quantify the uncertainties of CFD methods for SRP in a supersonic wind tunnel
environment.19




                                                      6 of 22

                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
III.     Test Facility
    The test will be conducted in the NASA Langley Research Center Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel, which is a
closed-circuit continuous-flow pressure tunnel with two test sections that each have a nominal 4-feet square
cross section. The tunnel consists of a 100,000 horsepower compressor, a dry air supply and evacuation
system, a cooling system, and paths that circulate air through either of the two test sections (see Figure 6).
The Mach number ranges are approximately 1.50 to 2.86 in test section 1 and 2.30 to 4.63 in test section
2. The SRP test will be conducted in test section 2 (see Figure 7), the same section that was used for a
2010 SRP test. The tunnel stagnation pressure can be varied up to a maximum of 100 psia in test section
2. The Mach number is controlled using an asymmetric sliding-block nozzle, which is used to select the
nozzle-throat to test-section area ratio. A re-characterization of the tunnel was recently completed, which
quantified non-uniform flow in the test section, with varying Mach number and non-zero flow angularity.24–26
This information will be used to define inflow conditions for CFD analysis of the SRP models with tunnel
walls included.




                      Figure 6. NASA Langley Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel complex.8




                                                      7 of 22

                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                 (a) Overview




                                          (b) Model support system


                  Figure 7. NASA Langley Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel (test section 2).8


    The test section envelope of Mach number and dynamic pressure is shown in Figure 8. Also shown are
the 2010 SRP test points and the two flight reference trajectories, with portions of the unpowered (thin
lines) and powered (thick lines) segments for each reference vehicle. Neither trajectory’s Mach number and
dynamic pressure enters the tunnel’s envelope, which is typical when comparing Mars conditions to wind
tunnel environments.




                                                    8 of 22

                              American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                    Dynamic Pressure vs. Mach Number
                         103
                                                                                  Low-L/D Reference
                                                                                  Mid-L/D Reference
                                                                                  Langley UPWT TS2
                                                                                  Langley UPWT (2010 Test)
                         102
               q (kPa)
                         101


                         100


                         10 1
                                0               1              2                  3              4           5
                                                                        M
Figure 8. Flight reference trajectories compared to UPWT test section 2 Mach number and dynamic pressure
envelope. Thicker lines indicate powered descent.


    Table 1 summarizes three LUPWT nominal conditions that are planned for the test campaign and have
been used for CFD calculations to date. The test section re-characterization was accomplished using nine-
teen five-hole probes mounted to a rake that was swept through the test section envelope (Figure 9). The
measurements confirmed non-uniform flow in the test section and the results will be used to support overall
test uncertainties. CFD analysis of the tunnel test section also was completed26 and is used in the CFD
analysis of the retropropulsion models.19


                                       Table 1. Planned LUPWT test conditions.

                                    Condition       M∞      T0 (◦ F )    Re∞ /f t     q̄ (lbf /f t2 )
                                       5            2.386     125            1           210.34
                                       20           3.477     125            1           153.22
                                       35           4.568     150           1.5          167.41




                                                               9 of 22

                                      American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                  Figure 9. Flow survey rake used for test section re-characterization.24, 25



IV.      Wind Tunnel Models
    The primary goal of the wind tunnel model design effort was to make the models as relevant to current
human-scale Mars flight reference vehicles as possible. The wind tunnel environment itself is different from
powered flight conditions at Mars in number of ways, including the freestream gas (air in the tunnel versus
CO2 at Mars), the Mach and Reynolds numbers, and the plume gases (cold air in the tunnel versus hot com-
bustion products in flight). However, there are a few aspects of the model design that can be controlled to
make the test closer to flight. The first is the model heatshield outer mold lines, which will be geometrically
scaled from the flight geometries. Second, the simulated engine nozzle exit locations for some models will be
placed on the heatshields at the same radial locations that previously were modeled at flight conditions.16
Also, some of the Low-L/D models, as well as the single Mid-L/D model, will have nozzle exit areas that
are the same, relative to the heatshield area, as the set of available flight reference vehicles. This approach
for scaling the model heatshield geometries and nozzles makes the current test campaign more relevant for
Mars powered flight compared to previous tests. However, there are several scaling parameters that cannot
be matched with air as the plume gas.

    The three main aspects of Mars powered flight that are significantly different in a wind tunnel test are
the thermodynamic properties of the plume gas (ratio of specific heats, molecular weight), the plume gas
temperature, and the nozzle exit-to-throat area ratio. Whereas the flight reference vehicles assume 177:1
exit-to-throat area ratio nozzles blowing hot combustion products in front of the vehicle, some concessions
in the nozzle geometry and plume gas modeling must be made in the wind tunnel model design. First, an
inert gas must be used in the LUPWT in place of real engines, which do not exist nor are they allowed in the
tunnel. HPA is already available in the facility and will be used as the exhaust simulant, but it cannot be
heated above about 250◦ F, which is well below the combustion product gas temperature in a flight engine.
For the proposed flight engines, the combustion product ratio of specific heats is about 1.28 versus 1.4 for
air. Finally, since the HPA cannot be heated significantly, the model nozzle area ratios must be significantly
reduced in order to avoid multi-phase air flow due to low temperatures in the expanded plumes. The baseline
models will have 4:1 area ratio nozzles, which is the same ratio that was used in the 2010 test campaign.


                                                     10 of 22

                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Using air, the nozzle exit Mach number is 2.94 based on isentropic nozzle relations. One of the Low-L/D
models will have 11:1 nozzles, which give an exit Mach number of 4. However, the expanded plume gas
temperatures will reach lower temperatures in front of the model and may lead to liquefaction.

    The Low-L/D and Mid-L/D models are shown in Figure 11 with the external geometry and the internal
flow path for the HPA, which enters the sting at a 90-degree angle. The model sizes are based on past
experience with blowing models in the LUPWT. The instrument housing and sting will be common between
the two models and the remaining components are tailored to each model. The main part of the two model
geometries that is scaled from flight is the front side of the heatshield. The external geometries elsewhere
were designed to provide enough internal volume for the instrumentation and HPA flow path.




                                                  (a) Low-L/D




                                                  (b) Mid-L/D


         Figure 10. Low-L/D (a) and Mid-L/D (b) model external geometries and HPA flow paths.


    Figure 11 shows front views of the two model variations: Low-L/D model with interchangeable nozzle
inserts (1A through 1F) and Mid-L/D model with a single nozzle configuration (2A). The CFD analysis
that has been completed to date at Mars flight conditions, as well as intuition, suggests that there are a
few key nozzle parameters that will affect the plume interference characteristics and hence the magnitude of
AI forces and moments measured in the wind tunnel. The Low-L/D model will be used to explore some of
these key parameters by using interchangeable nozzle inserts (see Table 2). Only a single set of nozzles will
be used in the Mid-L/D model.



                                                    11 of 22

                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
(a) 1A (Ae /At =4,    θcant =0◦ ,            (b) 1B (Ae /At =4,     θcant =20◦ ,         (c) 1C (Ae /At =4,   θcant =0◦ ,
Rn /Rb =0.434)                               Rn /Rb =0.434)                              Rn /Rb =0.434)




(d) 1D (Ae /At =11,   θcant =0◦ ,            (e) 1E (Ae /At =4,     θcant =20◦ ,         (f) 1F (Ae /At =4,   θcant =5◦ ,
Rn /Rb =0.434)                               Rn /Rb =0.6)                                Rn /Rb =0.434)




                                              (g) 2A (Ae /At =4, θcant =10◦ )


Figure 11. Wind tunnel models with a common heatshield and interchangeable nozzle inserts for the Low-L/D
model (1A through 1F). Red circles are locations of steady-state pressure measurements. Pink and gray circles
are locations of high-frequency pressure measurements.


    The key nozzle parameters for both models are shown in Table 2: nozzle  P   radial location on the heatshield
(Rn /Rb ), cant angle (θcant ), nozzle total exit-to-heatshield area ratio ( Ae /Aref ), nozzle exit-to-throat area
ratio (Ae /At ), and nozzle exit Mach number from compressible flow theory (Me ).

    Figure 12 shows the model 1A design with the HPA flow path visible. The flow path was designed to
accommodate a single HPA stream that delivers the same plenum conditions to all nozzles at the same
time. The HPA flow path contours were designed to reduce turning angles, which keeps total pressure and
temperature losses to an acceptable level. All nozzles will have 15-degree conical convergent and divergent
sections, with a short straight section for the throat. The nozzle exits are scarfed to follow the heatshield
surface contour. Figure 13 shows the model 1A design mounted to sting and tunnel support hardware.



                                                         12 of 22

                                    American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                     Table 2. Model parameters compared to flight reference vehicles.
                                                                      P
                    Geometry            Rn /Rb          θcant (deg)       Ae /Aref   Ae /At   Me
                 Low-L/D (Flight)        0.434                5           0.062       177     5.6
                       1A                0.434                0           0.062         4     2.94
                       1B                0.434               20           0.062         4     2.94
                       1C                0.434                0           0.112         4     2.94
                       1D                0.434                0           0.062        11     4.03
                       1E                 0.6                20           0.062         4     2.94
                       1F            0.434 (paired)           5           0.062         4     2.94
                 Mid-L/D (Flight)       N/A                  10           0.051       177     5.6
                       2A            Same as flight          10           0.051        4      2.94




                     Figure 12. Low-L/D model design with HPA internal flow path.




                Figure 13. Low-L/D model design mounted to sting and support hardware.


   Figure 14 shows pictures of fabricated model hardware taken during inspection. A fit check of all parts
was completed successfully, including all nozzle inserts and pressure instrumentation connections.




                                                      13 of 22

                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
    (a) Low-L/D heatshield with nozzle inserts removed                  (b) Low-L/D heatshield with nozzle inserts




(c) Low-L/D heatshield with main plenum and instrument              (d) Mid-L/D heatshield with nozzle inserts removed
housing




        (e) Mid-L/D heatshield with nozzle inserts            (f) Mid-L/D heatshield with main plenum and instrument
                                                              housing

                                            Figure 14. Model hardware.




                                                         14 of 22

                                  American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
V.      Instrumentation
   The upcoming test will incorporate some of the same types of measurements that were last used in the
2010 UPWT SRP test,8 in addition to new measurement techniques aimed specifically at the SRP problem.
Table 3 summarizes pressure and temperature measurements to be taken. As was done in 2010, static and
unsteady pressure will be measured at discrete locations on the external model surfaces and inside the flow
path. The external measurements will include static pressure taps and Kulites on the heatshield front and
rear surfaces where the most important interactions between the nozzle plumes and external flow are ex-
pected to occur; these measurements will be directly compared to unsteady and time-averaged CFD results.
Pressure measurements inside the model flow path will provide a status of the blowing HPA flowing through
the models. Finally, pressure measurements on the tunnel upper wall may be used to assess the possible
impact of the retropropulsion flowfield on the tunnel freestream conditions, such as excessive blockage or
unstart. Figure 15 shows the model pressure and temperature measurement locations and Figure 16 shows
pressure tap locations on the tunnel upper wall.


        Table 3. Model and tunnel pressure and temperature measurements with number of locations.

                                                   Steady discrete    Unsteady discrete   Steady     Discrete
                                      Location        pressure            pressure         PSP     Temperature
                         Model HPA flow path              0                    2          N/A          1
             Low-L/D model heatshield (front)            20                    6          Yes          0
              Low-L/D model heatshield (rear)             2                    4          No           0
                    Mid-L/D model heatshield             20                   15          Yes          0
                      Model centerbody (side)            29                    4          No           0
            Tunnel nozzle section (upper wall)           80                    0          N/A         N/A
               Tunnel test section (upper wall)          21                    0          N/A         N/A
     Tunnel model support section (upper wall)           18                    0          N/A         N/A




                                                       15 of 22

                                  American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
               (a) HPA flow path                                      (b) Low-L/D heatshield (front)




  (c) Low-L/D heatshield (rear) and centerbody                 (d) Low-L/D heatshield (rear) and centerbody




         (e) Mid-L/D heatshield (front)                               (f) Mid-L/D heatshield (front)


Figure 15. Model discrete pressure (”P” = steady, ”K” = unsteady) and temperature measurements.




                                                  16 of 22

                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                 Figure 16. Tunnel pressure measurements.


    Pressure-sensitive paint (PSP) will be applied to the front sides of both model heatshields in order to
provide steady-state pressure distributions that can be directly compared to time-averaged CFD pressures. A
high-speed digital camera will be used to record schlieren video in order to capture the dynamic interactions
between the nozzle plumes, model, and tunnel flow. Frame rates between 5,000 and 10,000 frames per second
were used for the 2010 test; a similar rate is expected to suffice for the upcoming test. The high-speed video
will provide quantitative data, such as observed unsteady frequencies and bow shock standoff distances, as
well as a qualitative picture of the overall aerodynamic-propulsive interaction flowfield.

    Delays in the facility and testing schedule allowed time for a new nozzle plume seeding device22 and
flow-through force and moment balance23 to be designed and built after the models were fabricated. The
seeding method shown in Figure 17 is based on a Venturi contraction that draws oil particles into the HPA
flow path and out the nozzles, where a laser sheet is used to observe the particles. The seeding method is
considered experimental for the upcoming test. The force and moment balance was designed specifically to be
retro-fitted to the models in order to measure six-component forces and moments during testing. Figure 18
shows the balance design and hardware. The balance is designed to optimize accuracy in the axial force
measurement, which is of high interest for powered flight. A shield was designed so that the balance will
measure forces and moments generated by the heatshield only. The flow adapters are designed to direct the
flow into and out of the balance section with manageable total pressure loss. Thrust measurements will be
made on the balance with the tunnel off to provide curves of thrust versus HPA total pressure. The measured
thrust will be subtracted from the measurements that are taken during the test in order to isolate the aero-
dynamic contributions from the model heatshield. The balance will provide the first known measurement
of six-component forces and moments in a retropropulsion wind tunnel test. Direct comparisons between
the balance measurements and CFD solvers will be the primary metric for assessing predictive modeling
capabilities.




                                                     17 of 22

                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                           Figure 17. Plume seeding concept.




      (a) Balance design with shield and flow adapter                                   (b) Balance




                  (c) Balance and shield                                          (d) Flow adapters

                              Figure 18. Six-component force and moment balance.



VI.      Test Matrix
   The test matrix for each model is designed to investigate plume/flowfield interactions as a function of
the main model and facility parameters: nozzle configuration, nozzle thrust, model angle of attack and roll
angle, and tunnel Mach number. Each model will be tested with plugged nozzles in order to measure surface
pressures and aerodynamic forces and moments and to compare to unpowered CFD cases and to previously


                                                        18 of 22

                                   American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
measured values for similar geometries. For blowing cases, the strategy will be to test each model for a
range of HPA total pressures over a range of model angles of attack and roll angles at each tunnel condition.
The range of HPA total pressure used for each model will be selected to follow a specific schedule of thrust
coefficients that is common across all blowing model configurations. The thrust coefficient upper bound for
each model will be based on whether tunnel interference or blockage is observed.

    The priorities for the test are as follows. First, the Low-L/D model will be given higher priority because
it is believed to be the more likely full-scale vehicle and because the model was designed to observe the
effects of various nozzle parameters. Second, the lowest Mach number (2.386 for tunnel condition 5) will be
prioritized in the test matrix because it is closest to the predicted in-flight Mach number at the start of SRP.
If the high-speed video and PSP methods do not permit simultaneous operation, due to insufficient room
for equipment next to the test section window, the video will be given higher priority. Finally, the force and
moment balance measurements will be given priority over all other measurements due to the importance of
having those measurements for CFD assessment. The plume seeding technique likely will be done at the end
of the test campaign due to its experimental nature and the unknown effects of the seeding oil on the model
and tunnel.


                                       Table 4. Test matrix parameters.

                          Parameter              Low-L/D Model                  Mid-L/D Model
                     Configurations    1 (plugged), 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, 1E, 1F      2 (plugged), 2A
                   Tunnel conditions                 5, 20, 35                      5, 20, 35
                      HPA pc (psia)                 up to 1500                     up to 1500
                       HPA Tc (◦ F )                 up to 250                     up to 250
                      Model α (deg)                  -10 to 20                      80 to 110
                      Model φ (deg)                0, 22.5 or 45                        0


    Figure 19 shows example test points at three different tunnel Mach numbers for model 1A for a range of
HPA total pressures (pc ). During the test at each model angle of attack and roll angle, the HPA pressure
will be adjusted to select a range of common thrust coefficients in order to explore AI versus that scaling pa-
rameter. The nozzle exit pressure divided by the freestream stagnation pressure (pe /p0,2 ), another common
plume scaling parameter, is an indication of how the nozzle plume will behave in terms of overall dimensions
and dynamic behavior. The plan for the test is to investigate each model for both over-expanded conditions,
where the nozzle exit pressure is lower than local ambient pressure in the shock layer, and under-expanded
conditions where the exit pressure is higher. The boundary between over- and under-expanded nozzles is
not well understood even for simple single-nozzle configurations, and the physics are more complicated for
multi-engine configurations and non-zero angles of attack.27 Coincidentally, the Low-L/D flight reference
vehicle with 177:1 engine nozzles has a pressure ratio of unity near the start of powered descent. Finally,
because the nozzle gas (air) and area ratios for the wind tunnel models are different than a real rocket engine,
flight values for CT and pe /p0,2 cannot be matched at the same time in the wind tunnel environment. This
reason, along with others discussed previously, means that the wind tunnel test data cannot be treated as a
true sub-scale version of flight.




                                                     19 of 22

                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                    Model: AETC 1A, Ae/At = 4.0, Dt = 0.155 in                                             Model: AETC 1A, Ae/At = 4.0, Dt = 0.155 in
                                              Tc = 250 oF, Neng = 8, cant = 0 deg, cone = 15 deg                                     Tc = 250 oF, Neng = 8, cant = 0 deg, cone = 15 deg
Vacuum CT = Total Vacuum Thrust / (q Aref)   6                                                                                      6

                                             5                                                         400                          5                                                        400


                                             4                                                                                      4
                                                                                                       300                                                                                   300




                                                                                                           pc (psia)




                                                                                                                                                                                                 pc (psia)
                                                                                                                       pe / p0, 2
                                             3                                                                                      3
                                                                                                       200                                                                                   200
                                             2                                                                                      2
                                                                                                       100                                                                                   100
                                             1                                                                                      1

                                             0                                                         0                            0                                                        0
                                              1.0     1.5   2.0   2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0    4.5   5.0                                 1.0     1.5   2.0   2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0   4.5   5.0
                                                                        M                                                                                      M
                                                                  (a) Thrust coefficient                                (b) Ratio of nozzle exit pressure to freestream post-shock stag-
                                                                                                                        nation pressure

       Figure 19. Sample Low-L/D model 1A thrust coefficients (a) and nozzle exit pressure ratios (b) for a range
       of nozzle total pressures (using one-dimensional isentropic nozzle equations). Reference powered flight trajec-
       tories with 177:1 engine nozzles are shown as black dashed lines.




                                                                                                               20 of 22

                                                                                    American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
VII.      Summary and Conclusions
    A sub-scale test will be run in the NASA Langley Research Center Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel test section
2 in order to investigate aerodynamic interference effects due to simulated retrorocket nozzle plumes at super-
sonic freestream conditions (supersonic retropropulsion). The main test objective is to collect data on wind
tunnel models that are derived from current NASA human-scale Mars powered descent vehicles, using air as
the simulated engine gas. Two wind tunnel models were designed and fabricated to be geometrically-scaled
versions of the current flight reference vehicles: a blunt sphere-cone vehicle and a more slender geometry.
Both models accommodate up to eight blowing nozzles, like the flight reference vehicles, and the blunt heat-
shield has interchangeable nozzle inserts that will allow different nozzle parameters to be investigated for
their effects on aerodynamic interference: location on heatshield, pointing direction, exit area divided by
heatshield area, and exit area divided by throat area. The test data will consist of six-component forces
and moments using a custom flow-through balance, high-speed schlieren video, steady and high-frequency
discrete surface pressures, global surface pressure using pressure-sensitive paint, and internal flow path pres-
sure and temperature. An experimental method for visualizing the nozzle plumes was developed and will
be part of the test campaign. The post-test analysis and documentation will include extensive uncertainty
quantification of both the data and parallel computational flowfield simulations at tunnel conditions.



Acknowledgments
    The wind tunnel model design, fabrication, and facility time are funded by NASA’s Aerosciences Evalu-
ation and Test Capability program office under the Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate.

  Nicholas Marino and Donald Morr of Millennium Engineering and Integration Services completed the
model designs for fabrication.




                                                     21 of 22

                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
References
      1 Braun, R. D., and Manning, R. M., “Mars Exploration Entry, Descent, and Landing Challenges,” Journal of Spacecraft

and Rockets, Vol. 44, No. 2, 2007, pp. 310–323.
      2 Dwyer-Ciancolo, A. M., et al, “Entry, Descent and Landing Systems Analysis Study: Phase 1 Report,” NASA TM

216720, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, July 2010.
      3 Dwyer-Ciancolo, A. M., et al, “Entry, Descent and Landing Systems Analysis Study: Phase 2 Report on Exploration

Feed-Forward Systems,” NASA TM 217055, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, February 2011.
      4 Edquist, K. T., Korzun, A. M., Dyakonov, A. A., Studak, J. W., Kipp, D. M., and Dupzyk, I. C., “Development

of Supersonic Retropropulsion for Future Mars Entry, Descent, and Landing Systems,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets,
Vol. 51, No. 3, 2014, pp. 650–663.
      5 Cianciolo, A. D., and Polsgrove, T. T., “Human Mars Entry, Descent, and Landing Architecture Study Overview,” AIAA

Paper 2016-5494, September 2016.
      6 Cianciolo, A. D., and Polsgrove, T. T., “Human Mars Entry, Descent and Landing Architecture Study: Phase 2 Summary,”

AIAA Paper 2018-5191, September 2018.
      7 Cianciolo, A. D., Korzun, A., Edquist, K., Samareh, J., Sostaric, R., Calderon, D., and Garcia, J. A., “Human Mars

Entry, Descent and Landing Architecture Study: Phase 3 Summary,” AIAA Paper 2020-1509, January 2020.
      8 Berry, S. A., Rhode, M. R., and Edquist, K. T., “Supersonic Retropropulsion Validation Experiment in the NASA Langley

Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 51, No. 3, 2014, pp. 664–679.
      9 Berry, S. A., Rhode, M. R., and Edquist, K. T., “Supersonic Retropropulsion Experimental Results from NASA Ames

9×7 Foot Supersonic Wind Tunnel,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 51, No. 3, 2014, pp. 724–734.
     10 Zarchi, K. A., Schauerhamer, D. G., Kleb, W. L., Carlson, J.-R., and Edquist, K. T., “Analysis of Navier-Stokes Codes

Applied to Supersonic Retropropulsion Wind–Tunnel Test,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 51, No. 3, 2014, pp. 680–
692.
     11 Schauerhamer, D. G. Zarchi, K. A., Kleb, W. L. Carlson, J.-R., and Edquist, K. T., “Supersonic Retropropulsion

Computational Fluid Dynamics Validation with Langley 4x4 Foot Test Data,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 51,
No. 3, 2014, pp. 693–714.
     12 Schauerhamer, D. G. Zarchi, K. A., Kleb, W. L., and Edquist, K. T., “Supersonic Retropropulsion Computational-Fluid-

Dynamics Validation with Ames 9x7 Foot Test Data,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 51, No. 3, 2014, pp. 735–749.
     13 Braun, R. D., Sforzo, B., and Campbell, C., “Advancing Supersonic Retropropulsion Using Mars-Relevant Flight Data:

An Overview,” AIAA Paper 2017-5292, September 2017.
     14 Edquist, K. T., et al, “Comparison of Navier-Stokes Flow Solvers to Falcon 9 Supersonic Retropropulsion Flight Data,”

AIAA Paper 2017-5296, September 2017.
     15 Sforzo, B. and Braun, R. D., “Feasibility of Supersonic Retropropulsion Based on Assessment of Mars-Relevant Flight

Data,” AIAA Paper 2017-5295, September 2017.
     16 Korzun, A., Canabal, F., Tang, C., Childs, R., Van Norman, J., Tynis, J., and Bibb, K., “Powered Descent Aerodynamics

for Low and Mid Lift-to-Drag Human Mars Entry, Descent and Landing Vehicles,” AIAA Paper 2020-1510, January 2020.
     17 Ross, J. C., et al, “Evaluation of CFD as a Surrogate for Wind-Tunnel Testing for Mach 2.4 to 4.6 - Project Overview,”

AIAA Paper 2021-2961, August 2021.
     18 Edquist, K. T., Korzun, A. M., Kleb, B., Hawke, V. M., Rizh, Y. M., Olsen, M. E., Canabal, F., “Model Design and

Pre-Test CFD Analysis for a Supersonic Retropropulsion Wind Tunnel Test,” AIAA Paper 2020-2230, January 2020.
     19 Edquist, K. T., Alter, S. J., Glass, C. E., Kleb, W. L., Korzun, A. M., Wood, W. A., Childs, R. E., Halstrom, L. D.,

Matsuno, K. V., and Canabal, F., “Computational Modeling of Mars Retropropulsion Concepts Tested in the Langley Unitary
Plan Wind Tunnel,” AIAA Paper 2022-XXXX, January 2022.
     20 Halstrom, L. D., Pulliam, T. H., Childs, R. E., and Stremel, P. M., “OVERFLOW Analysis of Supersonic Retropropulsion

Testing on a Blunt Mars Entry Vehicle Concept,” AIAA Paper 2022-XXXX, January 2022.
     21 Matsuno, K. V., Childs, R. E., Stremel, P. M., Garcia, J. A., and Pulliam, T. H., “OVERFLOW Analysis of Supersonic

Retropropulsion Testing on the CobraMRV Mars Entry Vehicle Concept,” AIAA Paper 2022-XXXX, January 2022.
     22 Acharya, A. S., Lowe, K. Todd, Danehy, P. M., Edquist, K. T., Burns, R. A., and Pham, H. T., “Seeding Method for

Velocimetry and Visualization of Supersonic Retropropulsion Nozzle Plumes,” AIAA Paper 2022-XXXX, January 2022.
     23 Burns, D. E., Parker, P. A., Cagle, C. M., Hawke, V. M., Tor, K. G., and Kleb, B., “A New Flow-Through Wind Tunnel

Balance for Retropropulsion Testing,” AIAA Paper 2022-XXXX, January 2022.
     24 Rhode, M. N., et al, “Flow Characterization of the NASA Langley Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel, Test Section 2: Experi-

mental Results,” Aiaa presentation, August 2021.
     25 Hubbard, E. P., and Houlden, H. P., “Evaluation of CFD as a Surrogate for Wind-Tunnel Testing: Experimental

Uncertainty Quantification for the UPWT Flow Survey Test,” AIAA Paper 2021-2962, August 2021.
     26 Childs, R. E., et al, “Flow Characterization of the NASA Langley Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel, Test Section 2: Compu-

tational Results,” AIAA Paper 2021-2963, August 2021.
     27 Korzun, A. M., and Cassel, L. A., “Scaling and Similitude in Single Nozzle Supersonic Retropropulsion Aerodynamics

Interference,” AIAA Paper 2020-0039, January 2020.




                                                           22 of 22

                                    American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
